1.4.1 HORIZONTAL LINES (OR CONSTANT FUNCTIONS) AND VERTICAL LINES

Now that we know our common functions and transformations, let's explore
transformations of basic functions. Let's begin with horizontal lines
and vertical lines (though vertical lines admittedly aren't functions of x).
To start, let's be sure we understand how vertical and horizontal lines are defined.

Given a point (a, b), how can we determine the vertical and horizontal lines
through that point? If we want a horizontal line, we know we want to make
sure our y-value is always the same no matter what the x-value is; so the
equation y=b gives us a horizontal line. We can also write this relation as a
function of x, as f(x) = b. Note that x does not show up in the very simple
"calculation" at all, as we want the y-coordinate, or output, to be b no regardless
of x-value. We say that in this case, f(x) is a constant function since it does not change.
Likewise, for the vertical line through the point (a, b), we want our x-coordinate to stay
constant as y varies, so we get the equation x = a. Think about why a vertical line is not a function of x.

Now that we have a better understanding of vertical and horizontal lines, we
can explore how transformations affect them. The most basic vertical line is
the relation x = 0 (or the y-axis), while the most basic horizontal line is the constant
function f(x) = 0 (or the x-axis)

1.4.2 LINEAR FUNCTIONS

The most basic (non constant) linear function is g(x) = x, and contains every
point of the form (a, a) where a is any real number. To graph the function
g(x) = x, we could start at the origin, and then move right 1 unti and up 1
unit (as it has a slope of 1) to get a second point of (1, 1) to graph this parent
function of all linear functions. We can then write any linear function f(x) as a
transformation of g(x) = x. Recalling the standard form of a transformation of a
function, we can write...

Notice how the simplified standard form of a linear function is very closely
related to the point-slope form of a line, y - y1 = m(x - x1), from an algebra
class but explicitly solved for y. Using function notation and an input value
of a, we would get... f(x) = m(x - a) + f(a)

If we were to use the point (0, f(0)), we would end up with the Expanded
(or slope-intercept) Form of a linear function.

In the figure below, the graph of a linear function with horizontal scale 1/4,
horizontal shift left 2, vertical reflection, and vertical shift up 2 is given
with its equation in standard form, simplified standard form, and expanded form. 
Note that for the standard form equation, we start at the point (2,2).