1.5 QUADRATIC FUNCTIONS

You may recall from previous coursework that a quadratic function, whose
graph is known as a parabola, is any function of the form f(x) = ax^2 + bx + c
where a, b, and c are real numbers with a not equal to 0.
This expanded form of the quadratic doesn't indicate the transformations from the
parent function q(x) = x^2. The important features of a quadratic function's graph are:
- axis intercepts,
- orientation
- vertex and
- axis of symmetry

As with any function of x, the x-intercepts, if any, can be found by setting f(x) = 0
and solving for x. Recall from algebra, that to solve a quadratic expression equal to zero,
we can solve by
- factoring
- completing the square, or
- the quadratic formula.

THE QUADRATIC FORMULA AND THE DETERMINANT

Given the quadratic function, f(x) = ax^2 + bx + c, the solution(s) to
f(x) = 0, if any, are of the form...

where b^2 - 4ac is called the determinant as its value will determine the number of
real zeros of the quadratic function. Meaning...
- if the determinate is zero, then the function has one real zero and hence
one x-intercept, and
- if the determinate is negative, then the function has no real zeros and hence
no x-intercepts.

Two features of a quadratic function that are easily determined in expanded
form of f(x) = ax^2 + bx + c are its y-intercept and its orientation. The y-intercept,
as for any function of x, is (0, f(0)), so a quadratic function has y-intercept
(0, c) where c is the constant term. The orientation of a quadratic functions refers
to whether the parabola opens upwards or downwards. If a > 0, the parabola will
open upwards, and if a < 0, the parabola will open downwards.
Depending on the orientation, the vertex of a quadratic function is the absolute
maximum or minimum of the function. Informally, the vertex is the "turning point"
of the parabola. The vertex of a quadratic function is the point with an x-coordinate
equal to the quadratic formula without the plus or minus the square root of the discriminant.

The axis of symmetry of a quadratic function is the vertical line intersecting
the vertex. So, if the vertex of a parabola is at the point (t, f(t)), then the axis
of symmetry will be the line x = t

For the basic parent quadratic function y = x^2, the x-intercept and y-intercept
are both the point (0, 0), the orientation is upwards, the vertex is also
the point (0, 0), and the axis of symmetry is the line x = 0, which is the y-axis.

Another way to find the vertex of a quadratic function is to rewrite the function
in standard form, commonly knwon as the vertex form.

A quadratic function is in standard, or vertex, form when it is written as
f(x) = c(x - b)^2 + d where c is not equal to 0 and is the vertical scale and (b, d)
is the vertex.

We also call this form vertex form since the shifts take the vertex of the parent
function p(x) = x^2 from (0, 0) to (b, d). When a quadratic function is given
in expanded form, rewriting the function in standard form involves completing the square,
which we will see done in Example 1.

Having a quadratic function in standard form makes it much more efficient to
find many of the features of the function. Standard form is already set up to solve
for the zeros very easily, as setting f(x) = 0 and solving for x gives us... 

While finding the y-intercept isn't quite as straight forward as it was with the
function in expanded form, (0, 0) still isn't too laborious of a calculation. As c
is the vertical scaling, it also will indicate the orientation. For example, we have
below the graph of g(x) = 2x^2 - 4x - 2, which can also be written in standard form as
g(x) = 2(x - 1)^2 - 4. We'll see in example 1 how we can rewrite an expanded form quadratic
in standard form.

Note that the while we are able to quickly determine the orientation and y-intercept
of (0, -2) from the expanded form, determining the vertex and axis of symmetry will require some 
calculations. The vertex form, on the other hand, indicates that the parent function of p(x) = x^2
is shifted right 1 and down 4 and vertically scaled by 2 so g still has an upward orientation,
has a vertex of (1, -4), and axis of symmetry of x = 1, but now finding the y-intercept takes some
calculation. Another nice feature of the vertex form of a quadratic function is that since we know
the function has an upward orientation and has been shifted downwards, we know that there will be
exactly two distinct real zeros and hence two x-intercepts without having to calculate the discriminant.
Determining the x-intercepts for either form does require some calculations. However,
recall that completing the square is one method of determining when a quadratic is equal to 0,
so a good portion of the work is already completed by putting the function in a vertex form.

