CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION TO RELATIONS AND FUNCTIONS

1.1 GRAPHICAL FEATURES AND RELATIONS

When we plot the ordered pairs from a relation on the Cartesian coordinate
plane, we call this a graphical representation of the relation. Two important
features that we use to describe graphical representations of relations are axis
intercepts and symmetry. Axis intercepts are points of a relation which lie on
the x-axis or y-axis. For a point to lie on the x-axis, the y-coordinate must be
equal to 0 as the point must not be above or below the x-axis. So to find
x-intercepts, we need only to look for points on a graph whose y-coordinate is 0
(when we only have an equation describing a relation, this is often easier said
than done). Similarly, to find y-intercepts, the x-coordinate must be equal to 0
since the point must not be to the left or right of the y-axis, so we look for
points on a graph whose x-coordinate is 0.

A graphical representation of a relation which has similar features on opposite
sides of an axis or around the origin is said to have symmetry. Saying that a
relation has x-axis symmetry means all of the following statements:
- Every point on the graph of the relation above the -axis has a "twin" point
on the relation below the x-axis, with the same x-coordinate and opposite y-coordinate.
- When the graph of the relation is reflected or "flipped" over the x-axis, we
get the same graph.
- Symbolically, if the relation contains the point (x, y), it must also have the
point (x, -y).

Relations given as an equation or expression provide us the opportunity to
determine all of these features algebraically. To determine the axis intercepts
and symmetry of a relation algebraically, we use the following techniques
(think about why they make sense)...

x-intercepts: Set y equal to 0 and solve for x. If a number c
is a solution, then (c, 0) is an x-intercept.

y-intercepts: Set x equal to 0 and solve for y. If a
number c is a solution, then (0, c) is a y-intercept.

x-axis symmetry: Replace every y with -- y and simplify
the equation. If the simplified equation is equivalent to the original
equation, then the relation has x-axis symmetry. If the simplified equation
is different from the original equation, then the relation does not have
x-axis symmetry.

y-axis symmetry: Replace every x with -x and simplify the equation.
If the simplified equation is equivalent to the original equation, then the
relation has y-axis symmetry. If the simplified equation is different from the original
equation, then the relation does not have y-axis symmetry.

origin symmetry: Replace every x with -x and every y with -y
and simplify the equation. If the simplified equation is equivalent
to the original equation, then the relation has origin symmetry. If the
simplified equation is different from the original equation, then the relation
does not have the origin symmetry.

plug in 0 for y to find x-intercepts
plug in 0 for x to find y-intercepts
replace x with -x to check for y-axis symmetry; this relation does not
have that symmetry
replace y with -y to check for x-axis symmetry; this relation does have
that symmetry
replace both variable with there opposites to check for origin symmetry;
this relation does not have that symmetry.