1.2 INTRODUCTION TO FUNCTIONS

A major subset of relations, and one that we will focus the majority of our
efforts on, is known as a function. A function is a relation in which every input
value has one and only one output value, and we say that the output value is a
function of the input value. Informally, function is a relation where we can 
determine precisely what every input value is "going to become."

1.2.1 DETERMINING WHETHER A RELATION IS FUNCTION

For a relation of ordered pairs (x, y), if every x-coordinate has at most one
respective y-coordinate, then we say that y is a function of x. So if our all of
our x-values are unique, we are guaranteed to have a function, but if an x-value
is repeated in the relation, the respective ordered pairs must be identical
or there would be an input with more than one output. Graphically, if y is a
function of x, then no x-value has more than one point associated with it.

When a relation is given in the form equation, one can determine if the
relation is a function graphically or algebraically. To determine if an equation
represents y as a function of x graphically, we graph the relation and use the
vertical line test. The vertical line test states that y is a function of x if and
only if no two points lie on the same vertical line. The vertical line test works since
if a vertical line intersects the relation more than once, there would be an
x-value with more than one y-value, as every point on a vertical line has the same
x-coordinate. To determine whether an equation for y and determine whether
each x-value in the relation will correspond with only one y-value.

1.2.2 DOMAIN AND RANGE

Given a function, the set of input values that get matched to an output is called
the domain of the function, while the set of output values of a function is
called the range. For example, for the function of x described by the set of
ordered pairs {(4, 5), (8, 3), (3, 3), (9, 7)}, the domain would be the set of all x
values, or {0, 3, 4, 8}, and the range would be the set of y all values, or {3, 5, 7},

It is important to emphasize that the terms domain and range refer strictly to
functions.

1.2.3 FUNCTION NOTATION

If a relation, call it f, represents y as a function of x, symbolically we say
y = f(x), read as "y equals f of x." This notation is called function notation
and makes it possible to eliminate the need for the y variable. For example we
know y = 2x + 3 describes y as a function of x as it already solved for y
and each x-value has one and only one y-value. If we replace y with f(x),
we now have the equation f(x) = 2x + 3 which now only has one variable. It is
for this reason that the input variable is often called the independent variable
and the output variable is often called the dependent variable. Function
notation denotes this relationship explicitly. This notation is especially handy
when trying to indicate which input value of the domain is to be plugged into 
the function. For example, if we continue with our example of
f(x) = 2x + 3, then f(1) means we are inputting the number 1 into the
function in the place of x. So, we see that f(1)f = 2(1) + 3 = 5. Function
notation is also used in ordered pairs as (x, f(x)). So staying with our
example from before, we now have the point (1, 5).

A function is not always denoted by the letter f and the input value isn't always
denoted by the letter x, although they are admittedly the most commonly used
symbols, even here. Many times it is best to use letters to more clearly indicate
the items or objects they represent. For example, if we want to use function
notation to describe the cost of manufacturing a certain number of t-shirts
when each t-shirt costs $5 and there is a flat setup fee of $23, we may want to
use the letter t to be the input variable (t-shirts) and c to be the output variable (cost)
So, we end up with the function notation c(t) = 5t + 23. Using this
notation, we know c(10) = 5(10) + 23 = 73 means that the cost of making 10
t-shirts is $73.

1.2.4 IMPLIED DOMAIN

There are several functions / operations that are not defined for certain values.
Two that you should be familiar with are dividing by 0 and even radicals / roots
of negative numbers. For these cases, we have what is known as implied
domain in play, meaning that the allowable inputs of the function are implied by
the function itself. For example, consider f(x) = 3 / x - 2 and g(x) = sqrt(3 - x) / x.

For f, it is implied that x cannot equal 2 as that would make the denominator 0.
So, the implied domain for (negative infinity, 2) to (2, infinity). Since g involves
an even radical and division, we have two domain restrictions to consider. Due to the square root,

1.2.5 TERMINOLOGY OF FUNCTIONS

Let's say that f is a relation such that y is a function of x, or y = f(x). There
are some distictions to be made when it comes to the important features of f.
First off, since f is a function, we know there is at most one y-intercept, since if
there were any more, then f would fail the vertical line test. There can be any
number of x-intercepts, though, and we refer to the x-coordinate of an x-intercept
as a root or zero of the function. The case where f(x) = 0 is the only case where f
can have x-axis symmetry, since otherwise, f would again not pass the vertical line test.
We describe f as an even function if it is symmetric about the y-axis, and an odd function
if it symmetric about the origin.

We say that a function is monotonic on an interval if, on the entire interval, it is
either:
- increasing or constant, or
- decreasing or constant.

That is, if the function is ever increasing on the interval, it will never be
decreasing on the interval, and vice versa.

Closely related to the idea of a function increasing, decreasing, or constant are
the concepts of maximums and minimums of functions (we sometimes use the
terms maxima and minima, or extrema). There are two different types of
maximums and minimums: absolute and local. The absolute (or global) maximum
of a function is the largest value of the function over the entire domain
while the absolute minimum is the smallest value of the function over the entire domain.
A local (or relative) maximum of a function is the largest value of a function
over an open interval of the domain but not necessarily the entire domain (although it may be).
Likewise, a local minimum of a function is the smallest value of a function over a open
interval of the domain. Graphically, a local maximum will look like the top of a hill (though
the top of this hill may be flat), while a local minimum look like the bottom of a valley (while again,
the valley's bottom may be flat). Algebraically, we say...

ABSOLUTE AND LOCAL EXTREMA

Suppose f is a function and a is a number in the domain of f. We say...
- f(a) is a local maximum of f if we can place a in an open interval I
contained within the domain of f, and f(a) is greater than or equal to f(b) for any number b in I.
- f(a) is a local minimum of f if we can place a in an open interval I
contained within the domain of f, and f(a) is less than or equal to f(b) for any number b in I.
- f(a) is a absolute maximum of f if f(a) is greater than or equal to f(b) for all b in the domain of f.
- f(a) is a absolute minimum of f if f(a) is less than or equal to for all b in the domain of f.